---
layout: post
title: Space exploration as a tool of diplomacy
category: defense
---
	
The past two decades have overwhelmingly been a time of cooperation in space exploration, and this is no mistake. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia emerged with its nuclear capability intact, lots of unused military-industrial capacity, and droves of unemployed engineers and researchers. At the same time, the US was looking to scale down the size of NASA and still build a new modular space station. Out of this budgetary necessity, and a stroke of diplomatic genius, Bill Clinton put Russian scientists and engineers to work building and maintaining civilian rockets (mostly the Soyuz), and producing some components of the new space station – instead of developing military tech to threaten the US’s new-found supremacy on the world stage.

In order to maintain its technical edge and grow its soft power abroad, the United States needs to expand international efforts in space. If the US designs the multi-national spacefaring institutions of the future with its own interests in mind, the country will continue to reap the benefits for decades to come.  Just look at the global financial system. In spite of all the Trump-hype around America’s decline, America becoming “like a third-world country,” the United States is more prosperous than ever. From the world financial system (tracing back to the post-war Bretton Woods system), to military alliances like NATO, to major regional trade agreements, the United States has left its mark on the world and it stands to benefit the most. Fears over China’s rise overshadow the enormous gains in wealth here in the US thanks to cheap imports. Not only that, but the United States has largely made China dependent on their exports to fuel economic growth. Whenever the Chinese Yuan gains too much value against the US dollar, exports plummet and the Chinese Central Bank has to step in and quickly inflate the currency. Overall, the United States has created a global climate very hospitable for itself.

Space beyond ISS provides this same opportunity. The United States has an opportunity to extend Pax Americana to space, and open up commercial development opportunities to all nations. If America does not lead a broad coalition of space-faring nations in exploring the cosmos, it is likely that space will become a heavily contested space in future conflicts, increasing the likelihood of a hot war between nuclear powers. Continued investment not only in NASA but in private enterprises like SpaceX, Bigelow Aeronautics, Boeing, &c. will ensure that international cooperation is the norm, not the exception in space. Money has a way of looking beyond international borders, beyond limiting ideas like nationalism. Corporate interests can have a positive effect on how  
