---
layout: post
title: Mars or bust?
category: defense
---
	
Six times humans have walked on the moon. All of these missions took place over 40 years ago. Some NASA boosters claim that this dearth of manned moon missions is a national tragedy. I couldn’t disagree more. The manned moon missions were a propaganda mission, a technological proof-of-concept, and a forward-looking push towards further exploration in the solar system. Their value was in seeing a few successful missions through, learning from the failures of Apollo 1 and Apollo 13, and advancing technology so modern-day marvels like the International Space Station could become a reality. Moon missions had no inherent value. The Moon is far less hospitible than 

The difference this time around is that there is no clear competitor for the race to the Moon. China is building up its space program at a rapid clip, but it also doesn’t have the same incentives as the USSR to refuse to cooperate with the US. The European Union is also continuing their investments in space. It remains to be seen what Russia’s role in space exploration will be once the ISS is decomissioned. As the former NASA chief Charles Bolden said, the mission to Mars “is likely to be a global effort.” But a few obstacles stand in the way. First off, NASA is expressly forbidden from co-operating with China on space projects. As China continuously demonstrates its prowess in high-tech, and given that US-China relations are much better than US-Russia ones, I expect that China will join Russia as one of our partners in space exploration. In the wake of Brexit, however, and with France and Italy (the 2nd and 3rd largest EU countries, respectively) facing a huge wave of anti-EU sentiment, the role of the European Space Agency is very much in limbo. The ability of the UK, France, Germany, and other smaller nations to engage with a mission to Mars on an individual basis is far reduced from that of the combined efforts of the ESA. For me, the biggest concern is that Russia-US relations will worsen and when the US no longer needs Russia’s Soyuz, the space cooperation between the two countries will collapse.

And that’s only the international politics side. The US’s investment in space exploration is vital to its continuing military and industrial superiority. Building rockets is expensive, and unless if Congress and the President can agree on a coherent vision for NASA, and budget enough money to make it work, we won’t see a Mars mission for a while. But if they put their minds to it, and if citizens got behind the effort to finance it, we could see some major manned missions in the next decade, and preliminary Mars landings in the 2030s. It’s going to require coordination across multiple administrations, Republican and Democrat, which is the real challenge. It’s a challenge to our democracy. Can we look much further than the next election cycle? Or can we see the potential for international diplomacy and the growth of the domestic tech sector? 
