---
layout: post
title: Anti-Satellite Missiles and their Dangers
category: defense
---
	
	Space is becoming far more democratic, as far as military access goes. From the launch of Sputnik in 1957, 12 countries have launched their own satellites into space using native technology. Dozens more have launch plans in the works. That leaves around 60 countries that have used other countries’ rockets to launch their own satellites.
	Civilian uses for space abound. Open Google Maps on your phone, and you’ll connect to satellites to use GPS. Take a look at Satellite view, and you’ll see images from above. Go home and flip on the TV. If you’re like the millions of Americans with Dish or DirecTV, you get your television from satellites too. However, this technology isn’t anything all that new. The military launched its first reconnaissance satellite in 1959. The GPS system was motivated by the necessity of the United States to develop accurate submarine-launched ballistic missiles (or SLBMs) and was only opened to the civilian market after a Korean Air flight was shot down after straying into Soviet territory. In short, many of the technologies we use today were developed because of the massive Cold War investment in high tech. 
	Although military technology tends to trickle down into civilian use cases, it has a significance of its own. The continuing democratization of space makes it easier for the United States to find partners to collaborate with. However, it also leads to growing fears about the weaponization of space, specifically anti-satellite weapons. As advanced nuclear platforms and even basic military operation grow increasingly dependent on systems like GPS and satellite telecommunications, especially for the US, China’s demonstrated anti-sat or ASAT capabilities are particularly alarming. In 2007 China launched a missile that destroyed a defunct weather satellite orbiting in low-earth polar orbit. US Intelligence also believes that a 2013 launch, with the claimed purpose of studying the ionosphere, was actually a demonstration of China’s ability to potentially take down geostationary satellites, the same ones that provide GPS coverage.
	The USA-193, a failed reconnaissance satellite launched two years before gave the US an excuse to test their ASAT platform. It was claimed that potentially some of the highly toxic hydrazine fuel onboard the craft could survive a crash into the atmosphere, bound to happen in the near future, harming people in contact with it. Regardless, the US successfully demonstrated its ASAT capability one year after China. Russia has also successfully tested its own missiles. This being said, all tests so far have been conducted against low-orbit satellites, which mostly conduct reconnaissance.
	This being said, using ASAT missiles against reconnaissance satellites is a very expensive endeavor. These missiles often do double duty as Anti-ballistic Missiles or ABMs, used to shoot down nuclear missiles, which makes them indispensable in a war between two nuclear foes. ABMs used for ASAT are far from cheap ($100M a piece for the US launch) and since China has around 400 nuclear warheads (and Russia more than 1000), that’s no pocket change. In addition, the United States in particular has a robust airborne reconnaissance system. In fact, the US is perhaps the only nation with a robust history of building spy planes. In addition, the US’s airborne radar-scanning aircraft are the best in the world. Satellites are the main source of intelligence because of their consistency and reliability (and their legal recognition under international law), but aircraft will do the trick in a wartime situation.
	As a result, I’m of the opinion that the ASAT tests by the three major nuclear nations were simply a demonstration of their domestic high tech industries and the capabilities of their ABMs to take down even the fastest-moving missiles. China definitely wants to show the United States that it no longer has supremacy close to China’s shores. Although an invasion of Taiwan or any US allies in the Pacific is unlikely, China’s muscle-flexing demonstrates that if the US wants to contest Chinese claims in the South China Sea, for example, it must proceed with caution.
