---
layout: post
title: How to Kentucky (part 1): Driving
date: 2022-07-19T12:40:00
---

I moved out of state from urban Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to rural Stanton, Kentucky this year. This is part 1 in a practical guide on moving here.

Getting a car registered in Kentucky is an exercise in bureaucracy. You're going to interact with your county clerk and sheriff's office. It took me a bit of research to figure everything out, so here's what I found.

Here's the up-to-date playbook from the state of Kentucky: [New to Kentucky](https://drive.ky.gov/Pages/New-to-Kentucky.aspx)

# Title and registration

Under Kentucky law, you have to register your car within 15 days of setting up permanent residence within Kentucky. If your car is titled in another state, you will also have to retitle your car in Kentucky.

First, get a Kentucky auto insurance policy that meets state requirements. You'll need your insurance policy to take effect within 45 days of registration. I cut mine over effective immediately.

To transfer a vehicle from out of state, go to your county sheriff's office with the following:
 - your existing car title
 - a copy of form [TC-96-182](http://transportation.ky.gov/Organizational-Resources/Forms/TC%2096-182.pdf). The sheriff will sign in the box to verify that the title is for the vehicle in question.
 - a checkbook or other approved form of payment. Powell County asked for a $5.00 check.
 
Once you've received the sheriff's signoff, go to the County Clerk's office to finalize the new Kentucky title and registration. Find your county clerk's contact info [here](https://drive.ky.gov/Pages/County-clerks.aspx). Bring the following documents:

 - your photo ID
 - proof of KY insurance within 45 days (either a insurance disclosure or insurance card)
 - the filled out TC-96-182 form
 - checkbook or approved form of payment
 - a signed affadavit (marriage license, divorce papers, etc) for any name discrepancy between the old title and your current photo ID 
 
# Driver's license

You have 30 days under Kentucky law to get a new state drivers' license. I found the process to be quick and painless.

Use this [tool](https://drive.ky.gov/driver-licensing/Pages/Regional-Offices-Map.aspx) to find the regional drivers license center nearest you. I scheduled an appointment through the online portal, but they allow walk-ins.

You need to bring proof of identity, proof of Social Security Number, proof of residency, and your old license to get a Kentucky license. Look at this handy [checklist](https://drive.ky.gov/Docs/ValidProofDocuments.pdf) for all the accepted documentation. 

More information is available on the Kentucky drivers license [page](https://drive.ky.gov/driver-licensing/Pages/Drivers-License-and-ID-Card.aspx). 
